# snap-enrollment

The data that I gathered came from the U.S. Department of Agriculture, the U.S. Census and the National Conference of State Legislatures (NCSL). The first pass of my data collection process was a simple Google search. I traced various articles and websites to their government sources before getting a grasp on how to search for the type of data I was looking for. I encountered numerous datasets that were scaled incorrectly for my purposes. For example, I wanted data on individuals, but often first encountered data on households. Ultimately, I extracted and compiled information from four datasets. For the purposes of this project, I used data only from fiscal year 2015. On the USDA website, I found a dataset on the number of individuals participating in SNAP by state. The dataset was organized by state as well as region, and it specified the monthly participation for each state for fiscal year 2015. I copied and pasted each of the state-wide annual totals into a separate spreadsheet, where I stored all my final data. From the Census, I gathered state-level estimates of the number of individuals living below the poverty line as well as state population estimates. The poverty data was organized by year and state, with additional statistical information about the estimates specified. I copied the 2015 estimates into my final spreadsheet, converting the units from thousands of persons to persons. I also used the annual population estimates in the final dataset. Finally, the NCSL provided me with information on partisan control of each state’s legislature. This information was in a PDF, so I recorded each piece of information manually. My final dataset includes six columns: ‘state’, ‘leg_con’ (party in control of legislature), ‘pop’ (state population), ‘num_poor’ (number of individuals below the poverty line), ‘SNAP_num’ (number of individuals participating in SNAP), ‘perc_poor’ (‘num_poor’/ ‘pop’), ‘perc_partic’ (“SNAP_num”/ “pop”). See Table 1 for a list of variables and their meanings. To tidy the data, I converted the political parties into ID numbers (0 being Republican, 1 being Democrat, and 2 being non-partisan or split) for the leg_con variable. Excluding the row for the column headers, there are fifty rows, one for each state. 

I was highly intentional in selecting these variables. I chose to use the party in control of the legislature as a proxy for a state’s political leaning, because the legislature makes policy decisions, including regarding the dispersment of public benefits. The only additional variable that I chose to control for was poverty rate. To keep the model simple, as an initial analysis of the hypothesis, the only confounding variable I controlled for was poverty rate. Without controlling for poverty, findings on any other variable contributing to SNAP enrollment would be virtually meaningless, since any variation could be explained by differing numbers of in-need persons. I intentionally used the poverty rate instead of a measure for qualifying individuals, because states decide some of the details on program qualifications. Using poverty rate created consistency in comparing states, avoiding the introduction of an additional bias. 
